So, we've now put in a lot
of work designing and
analyzing super fast algorithms for
reasoning about graphs.
So in this optional video,
what I want to do is show you why you
might want such a primitive, especially
for computation on extremely large graphs.
Specifically, we're going to look at the
results of a famous study that computes
the strongly connected
components of the web graph.
So what is the web graph?
Well it's the graph in which
the vertices correspond to webpages.
So for example I have my own webpage
where I list my research papers and
also links to courses, such as this one.
And the edges are going to be directed and
they correspond precisely to hyperlinks.
So the links that bring you
from one web page to another.
Note, of course, these are directed edges,
where the tail is the page
that contains the hyperlink.
And the head is the page that you
go to if you click the hyperlink.
And so, this is a directed graph.
So from my home page you can get to
my papers, you can get to my courses.
Sometimes I have random links up to things
I like, say, my favorite record store.
And of course for many of these webpages,
there are additional links going out or
going in.
So for example, from my papers I
might link to some of my co-authors.
Some of my co-authors might be
linking from their homepages to me.
Or of course, there's webpages out there
which list the currently available
free online courses and so on.
So obviously,
this is just part of a massive web graph,
just a tiny, tiny piece of it.
So the origins of the web were
probably around 1990 or so, but
it started to really
explode in the mid 90s.
And by the year 2000, it was sort
of already beyond comprehension.
Even though, in Internet years,
the year 2000 is sort of the stone age,
relative to right now, relative to 2012.
But still, even by 2000 people were so
overwhelmed with the massive
scale of the web graph,
they wanted to understand anything
about it, even the most basic things.
Now of course, one issue with
understanding what the graph looks like is
you don't even have it locally, right?
It's distributed over all of these
different servers over the entire world.
So the first thing people
really focused on,
when the wanted to answer this question,
was on techniques for crawling.
So having software which just
follows lots of hyperlinks,
reports back to the home base,
from which you can assemble
at least some kind of sketch of
what this graph actually is.
But then the question is, even once
you have this crawled information,
even once you've accessed a good chunk of
the nodes and the edges of this network,
what does it look like?
So what makes this a difficult question,
more difficult than, say, for
any other directed graph
you might encounter?
Well, it's simply the massive scale
of the web graph, it's just so big.
So for the graph used in the particular
study I'm going to discuss, like we said,
it was in the year 2000, which is sort
of the stone age compared to 2012.
So the graph was small, relatively, but
still the graph was really, really big.
So it was something like
200 million nodes and
one billion edges, really one and
a half billion edges.
So the reference for the work I'm going to
discuss is a paper by a number of authors.
The first author is Andre Broder and
then he has many co-authors and
this was a paper that appeared in
the WWW Conference of the year 2000,
that's the World Wide Web Conference.
And I encourage to those of you who
are interested to go track down
the paper online and
read the original source.
So Andre Broder,
the lead author, at this time he was at
a company that was called Alta Vista.
So how many of you remember
a company called Alta Vista?
Well, some of you,
especially the youngest ones among you
maybe have never heard of Alta Vista.
And the youngest ones among you
maybe can't even conceive of a world
in which we didn't have Google.
But in fact, there was a time when we had
web search, but Google did not yet exist.
That was sort of in the maybe '97 or so,
and so this is in the very embryonic
years of Google, and this data set
actually came out of Alta Vista instead.
So Broder et al wanted to get
some answers to this question,
what does this web graph look like?
And they approached it in a few ways.
But the one I'm going to focus on here is,
they asked, well,
what's the most detailed structure
we can get about this web graph,
without doing an infeasible
amount of computation?
Really just sticking to linear
time algorithms, at the worst.
And, what have we seen?
We've seen that in a directed graph you
can get full connectivity information
just really using depth first search.
That you can compute strongly
connected components in linear time
with small constants.
And that's one of the major things
that they did in this study.
Now if you wanted to do
the same computation today,
you'd have one thing going against you and
one thing going for you.
The obvious thing that you'd have going
against you is that the web is still very
much bigger than it was here,
certainly by an order of magnitude.
The thing that you'd have going for you
is now there's specialized systems which
are meant to operate on massive data sets.
And in particular,
they can do things like compute
connectivity information on graph data.
So what you have to remember, for
those of you who are aware of these terms,
in 2000 there was no MapReduce,
there was no Hadoop.
There were no tools for
automated processing large data sets,
these guys really had
to do it from scratch.
So let me tell you about what Broder et al
found when they did strong connectivity
computations on the web graph.
They explain their results in what they
called the bow tie picture of the web.
So let's begin with the center,
or the knot of the bow tie.
So in the middle we have what we're
going to call a giant strongly connected
component.
With the interpretation being this is
the core of the web in some sense.
All right, so all of you know
what an SCC is at this point.
A strongly connected component is a region
from which you can get from any point to
any other point along a directed path.
So in the context of the web graph, with
this giant SCC, what this means is that
from any webpage inside this blob, you can
get to any other webpage inside this blob,
just by traversing
a sequence of hyperlinks.
And hopefully it doesn't strike you as too
surprising that a big chunk of the web
is strongly connected,
is well-connected in this sense, right?
So if you think about all the different
universities in the world,
probably all of the webpages corresponding
to all of the different universities,
you can get from any one
place to any other place.
For example, from the homepage on which I
put my papers, I often include links to my
co-authors, which very commonly
are at other universities.
So that already provides a web link from
some Stanford page to some page at say,
Berkeley or Cornell or whatever.
And of course, I'm just one person,
I'm just one of many faculty
members at Stanford.
So you put all of these together,
you would expect all of the different SCCs
corresponding to different universities
to collapse into a single one.
And so on for other sectors as well.
And then of course, if you knew that
a huge chunk of the web was in the same
strongly connected component,
so let's say 10% of the web, which
would be tens of millions of webpages.
You wouldn't expect there
to be a second one, right?
It would be super weird if there were two
different blobs, 10 million web pages
each that somehow were not mutually
reachable from each other.
All it takes to collapse two
SCCs into one is a lone arc
going from one to the other and then
a lone arc going in the reverse direction.
And then those two SCCs collapse into one.
So we do expect a giant SCC,
just sort of thinking anecdotally
about what the web looks like.
And then once we realize
there's one giant SCC,
we don't expect there to be more than one.
All right, so is that the whole story?
Is the web graph just one big SCC?
Well, one of the perhaps interesting
findings of this Broder et al paper
is that there is a giant SCC, but it
doesn't actually take up the whole web, or
anything really that
close to the entire web.
So what else would there
be in such a picture?
Well, there's the other two ends of
the bow tie, which are called the in and
the out regions.
In the out regions you have a bunch
of strongly connected components,
not giant SCCs.
We've established their shouldn't
be any other giant SCCs.
But small SCCs, which you can reach from
the giant strongly connected component.
But from which you cannot go back to
I encourage you to think about what types
of websites you would expect to see
in this out part of the bow tie.
I'll give you one example.
Very often if you look at a corporate
site, including those of well known
corporations, which you would definitely
expect to be reachable from the giant SCC.
It's actually a corporate policy that
no hyperlinks can go from something in
the corporate site to something
outside the corporate site.
So that means the corporate site is
going to be a collection of webpages,
which is certainly strongly connected.
Because it's a major corporation, you can
certainly get there from the giant SCC.
But because of its corporate policy,
you can't get back out.
Symmetrically, in the in
part of the bow tie,
you have strongly connected components,
generally small ones.
From which you can reach the giant SCC,
but
you cannot get to them from the giant SCC.
Again, I encourage you to think about all
the different types of webpages you might
expect to see in this
in part of the bow tie.
Certainly I think one really obvious
example would be new webpages.
So if you just create something, and
then if I just created a webpage and
pointed it to Stanford University, that
would immediately be in this in component
or this in collection of components.
Now, if you think about it,
this does not exhaust all of
the possibilities of where nodes can lie.
There's a few other cases that frankly
are pretty weird, but they're there.
You can have passive hyperlinks,
which bypass the giant SCC and
go straight from the in part of
the bow tie to the out part.
So Broder et al suggested
calling these tubes.
And then there's also a kind of very
curious outgrowths going out of the in
component, but which don't make
it all the way to the giant SCC.
And similarly, there's stuff which
goes into the out component.
And Broder et al recommended calling
these strange creatures tendrils.
And then, in fact,
you can just have some weird
isolated islands of SCCs that are not
connected, even weakly, to the giant SCC.
So this is the picture that
emerged from Broder et al's strong
component computation on the web graph.
And here's, qualitatively, some of
the main findings that they came up with.
So first of all, that picture on the
previous slide I drew roughly to scale.
In the sense that all four parts,
so the giant SCC, the in part,
the out part, and then the residual stuff,
the tubes and tendrils,
have roughly the same size, more or
less 25% of the nodes in the graph.
I think this is surprising people.
I think some people might
have thought that the core,
that the giant SCC might have been
a little bit bigger than just 25 or 28%.
But it turns out there's a lot of
other stuff outside of this strongly
connected core.
You might wonder if this is just
an artifact of this data set
being from the stone age,
being from 2000 or so.
But people have rerun this experiment
on the web graph again in later years.
And of course the numbers are changing
because the graph is growing rapidly.
But these qualitative findings
have seemed pretty stable
throughout subsequent reevaluations
of the structure of the web.
On the other hand, while the core of
the web is not as big as you might have
expected, it's extremely well connected.
Perhaps better connected then
you might have expected.
Now you'd be right to ask the question,
what could I mean by
unusually well connected?
We've already established that this giant
core of the web is strongly connected.
You can get from any one place to any
other place via a sequence of hyperlinks.
What else could you want?
Well in fact, it has a very richer
notion of connectivity called the small
world property.
So let me tell you about
the small world property or
the phenomenon colloquially known
as six degrees of separation.
So this is an idea that had been in the
air at least since the early 20th century,
but really kind of was studied in a major
way and popularized by Stanley Milgram,
who's a social scientist, back in 1967.
So, Milgram was interested in
understanding, are people at great
distance, in fact, connected by
a short change of intermediaries?
So, the way he evaluated this,
he ran the following experiment.
He identified a friend in Boston,
Massachusetts, a doctor, I believe.
And so this was going to be the target.
And then he identified a bunch of
people who were thought to be far away,
both culturally and geographically,
specifically Omaha.
So for
those of you who don't live in the US,
just take it on faith that many people
in the US would regard Boston and
Omaha as being fairly far apart,
geographically and otherwise.
And what did is he wrote each of these
residents of Omaha the following letter.
He said, look, here is the name and
address of this doctor
who lives in Boston.
Your job is to get this letter
to this doctor in Boston.
Now, you're not allowed to mail
the letter directly to the doctor.
Instead, you need to mail
it to an intermediary,
someone who you know
on a first name basis.
So of course, if you knew
the doctor on a first name basis,
you could mail it straight to them,
but that was very unlikely.
So what people would do in Omaha is they'd
say, well, I don't know any doctors or
I don't know anyone in Boston, but
at least I know somebody in Pittsburgh.
And at least that's closer to Boston
than Omaha, that's further eastward.
Or maybe someone would say, well, I don't
really know anyone on the east coast but
at least I do know some
doctors here in Omaha.
And so they'd give the letter to
somebody that they knew on a first name
basis in Omaha.
And then the situation would repeat.
Whoever got the letter, again they'd
be given the same instructions.
If you know this doctor in Boston on
a first name basis, send him the letter.
Otherwise, pass the letter on to somebody
who seems more likely closer to them
than you are.
Now, of course, many of these letters
never reach their destination, but
shocking, at least to me,
is that a lot of them did.
So something like 25%, at least,
of the letters that they started
with made it all the way to Boston.
Which I think says something about people
in the late 60s just having more free time
on their hands than they do
in the early 21st century.
I find this hard to imagine,
but it's a fact.
So you had dozens and dozens of letters
reaching this doctor in Boston.
And they were able to trace exactly which
path of individuals the letter went along
before it eventually reached
this doctor in Boston.
And so then what they did is they looked
at the distribution of chain links.
So how many intermediaries were required
to get from some random person in Omaha to
this doctor in Boston?
Some were as few as two, some were as big
as nine but the average number of hops,
the average number of intermediaries, was
in the range of five and a half or six.
And so this is what has given
rise to the colloquialism,
even the name of a popular play,
the six degrees of separation.
So that's the origin myth,
that's where this phrase comes from, these
sort of experiments with physical letters.
But now in network science, the small
world property is meant to be a network.
Which on the one hand is richly connected,
but also in some sense there are enough
cues about which links are likely
to get closer to some target.
So that if you need to route
information from point a to point b,
not only is there a short path,
but if you in some sense follow your nose,
then you'll actually exhibit a short path.
So in some sense, routing information
is easy in small world networks.
Now this is exactly the property
that Broder et al identified
within this giant SCC.
Very rich with short paths, and if you
want to get from point a to point b,
just follow your nose and you'll do great.
You don't need a very sophisticated
shortest path algorithm
to find a short path.
Some of you may have heard
of Sammy Milgram, not for
the small world experiment,
but for another famous, or
maybe infamous experiment
he did earlier in the 60s.
Which consisted into tricking volunteers
into thinking they are subjecting other
human beings to massive
doses of electric shocks.
So that wound up causing a rewrite
to certain standards of ethics in
experimental psychology.
You don't hear about that so much when
people are talking about networks,
but that's another reason why
Milgram's work is well known.
And just as a point of contrast,
outside of this giant strongly connected
component, which has this rich small world
structure, very poor connectivity in
the other parts of the web graph.
So there's lots of cool research going on
these days about the study of information
networks like the web graph.
So I don't want you to get the impression
that the entire interaction
between algorithms and thinking about
information networks has just been
this one strongly connected
component computation in 2000.
Of course,
there's all kinds of interactions.
I've just singled one out that was easy to
explain and also highly intellectual and
interesting back in the day.
But these days, lots of stuff's going on.
People are thinking about
information networks in all kinds of
different ways and of course algorithms,
like in almost everything,
is playing a very fundamental role.
So let me just dash off sort of a few
examples, maybe to whet your appetite.
Maybe you want to go explore this topic
in greater depth outside of this course.
So one super interesting question is,
rather than looking at a static snapshot
of the web, like we were doing so
far in this video,
the web's changing all the time.
New pages are getting created,
new links are getting created and
destroyed and so on.
And how does this evolution proceed?
Can we have a mathematical model,
which faithfully reproduces
the most important first order
properties of this evolutionary process?
So a second issue is to think not just
about the dynamics of the graph itself,
but the dynamics of information
that gets carried by the graph.
And you could ask this both about the web
graph and about other social networks,
like say, Facebook or Twitter.
Another really important topic,
which there's been a lot of work on, but
we still don't fully
understand by any means,
is getting at the finer grain structure
in networks including the web graph.
In particular, what we'd really like
to do is have foolproof methods for
identifying communities.
So groups of nodes, this could either
be webpages in the web graph or
individuals in a social network, which
we should think of as grouped together.
We discussed this a little bit when
we talked about applications of cuts.
One motivation for cuts is to identify
communities, if you think of communities
as being relatively densely connected
inside and sparsely connected outside.
But that's just a baby step.
Really, we need much better techniques for
both defining and computing communities
in these kinds of networks.
So I think these questions
are super interesting,
both from a mathematical/technical level,
but also they're very timely.
Answering them really helps us
understand our world better.
Unfortunately, these are going to
be well outside the course of just
the bread-and-butter design
analysis of algorithms,
which is what I'm tasked
with covering here.
But I will leave you with a reference book
that I recommend if you want to read more
about these topics.
Namely, the quite recent
book by David Easley and
John Kleinberg called Networks,
Crowds, and Markets.